<h1>[...] a brief evocation after one of several field trips last winter (in Texas), part of a workshop on "Underground Spatialities."</h1>

Early morning, waterfall outside gathering point, the ship in the sky, made of blue steel, heliocopter hovering next to the ship in the sky (Memorial Hospital). The engineer thinks it has a camera underneath its belly. The helicopter photographs us from above. I get my camera ready.

I crawl under the “Exhaust.” A beautiful abstract artwork, a double helix-like sculpture apparently built next to the control room of the plant, where the vent should have been.  No one probably knows it is here. The exhaust was abandoned, a sculpture put in its place. We go inside the plant and are greeted by the staff. Harvey, the engineer, will be our guide.

He takes us into the Noise Room of the plant, and before entering, we pass by the ‘Gym of Broken Dreams.’ When I ask, Harvey explains he does not see any progress in his colleagues’ hard workout sessions with the heavy weights. Thus the name.

Descending down the stairs into the Tunnels (underneath Rice University campus in Houston), the noise from the plant turbines is overwhelming. No word can be heard. The group descends, one by one, down the stairs, I am the last, and soon have lost track, the group moves swiftly and I am left behind, in a way of course that was on purpose so I could begin to feel alone and at home in the under ground tunnel with its left and right pipelines.  Left: Steam. Right:  Chilled Water.  Or vice versa. There are also electrical cables and, from the older recent days, network fiber optics cables. 

Archaeologically speaking, we move from newest tunnels (wider) to older tunnels (narrower) to very old tunnels (very narrow) – built 10 years ago, 20 to 30 years ago, to 80 years ago.  Our movement will perhaps not reach the oldest corridors, as they are so tight and narrow and wet, and thus less passable. Today we are not cavers, only tunnel walkers. One might have to crawl on occasion? Today we do not crawl, though we bend (under) and climb (over) pipes.

Heading into the labyrinth. As I have lost touch with the group, and can only hear faint noise of voices receding, I have to make guesses, go right, then left, then right again, then straight, back, and forward again.

Tunnels are geometric. Linear. Straightforward and uneventful. The same, ad infinitum. Pipes on the left, pipes on the right, at some point, one reaches what the engineers, strangely, call the ‘Ballroom.’ I see no dances (I will later try to create one on in the theatre, using ice hockey as my movement inspiration, see pic on the right). But one has a little space to turn, admire graffiti and wall paintings, and listen to the periodic severe crackling of condensation as it gets “trapped” in a trap.

Trapping noise – this is the most beautiful sensation I imagine hearing, crackle music, sonic distortion, cracked media. Over the last decades, artists and musicians manipulated, cracked, and broke audio media technologies to produce such cracked sounds in performances. Here, the tunnels offer quite casually such an extended sound palette, including tiny trickles, whispers of water drops, and scratches, as one looks and looks and does not see much (apart from one long corridor where student invaders have left their scribblings and cave paintings. Charlie was here. Tommy loves Ryan. Fuck everything. I miss Hannah. You know nothing. 

Water and steam and electrical grid are running there, as I walk up and down aimlessly. Valves draw attention, sand and dirt on the HVAC piping, some older  rusty metal pipes are wet, as if sweating. The floor is concrete, some holes in the ceiling mean they are manholes to provide exit to the above. Below: The hydronic systems (both chilled and heating water) are closed-loop systems, meaning, I gather, that the total dynamic head of the pumps takes into account the friction losses within the piping system, associated coils, valves, and accessories…

I end up trying to wait patiently for quiet, and then the sound: recording the ticks, pops, and clicks of the glitches of this hydronic underground system, the tunnel only there to provide its safe operation for the 20m dollar annual utilities budget, using 250 million gallons of domestic water for the servicing of the university above the under ground. I also wait patiently for Harvey to turn off the electric lights in the long corridor where I wait at the end, wanting to walk in the dark. Finally, I see him at the far end, switching off the last light. I am alone in the dark now, able to listen without distraction.

--

Feb. 2019, <b>Johannes Birringer</b>
